First RFC on RFCs. (#1)
chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-rfcs: rfcs/xxxx-rfc-process/text.md

# RFC Process <img style="float: right;" src="./imgs/monkey_mascot.jpg" width="200">

**Authors:** [Arathi Mani](mailto:arathi.mani@chanzuckerberg.com)

> **Approvers:** [Timmy Huang](mailto:thuang@chanzuckerberg.com), [Marcus Kinsella](mkinsella@chanzuckerberg.com), [Brian Raymor](mailto:braymor@chanzuckerberg.com)

Reviewer: I do not believe that I should be an approver of a *Dev* software practice. I'm happy to be a reviewer and advise based on my experience with the use of github in standards organizations and my related research on PIP and Rust when developing the DCP RFC Process.

Based on the template, I'm not anticipating that PM or UX would be creating RFCs for product plans or UX designs?

Author: Thank you; I added you as an approver because of your experience, but have moved you to Reviewer now :) 

No, I have not assumed here that PM or UX would be creating RFCs, but happy to have a conversation if that is ideally the case. I'd love for either PM or UX to spearhead that conversation and/or create templates.

**Reviewers:** [Madison Dunitz](madison.dunitz@chanzuckerberg.com), [Brian McCandless](bmccandless@chanzuckerberg.com), [Trent Smith](trent.smith@chanzuckerberg.com), [Colin Megill](colin.megill@chanzuckerberg.com), [Seve Badajoz](sbadajoz@chanzuckerberg.com)

## tl;dr 

This RFC contains the details about the RFC process for all cellxgene related designs.

## Background

Previously the "RFC" (a.k.a. "design doc review") process was executed on Google Docs. There were two problems

1. Updates were quite tricky to make. Do you update the doc directly? Do you have a changelog? Which version is latest? Do you need to apply the change in the changelog in the body of the doc? 

> 2. Designs decisions were not easily accessibly by our external community. How does the external community, with whom we have a close relationship, keep track of our decisions and progress if the designs are hidden in a private Google Drive?

Reviewer 2: little typo: accessibly->accessible

Author: Oops

> 2. Designs decisions were not easily accessible by our external community. How does the external community, with whom we have a close relationship, keep track of our decisions and progress if the designs are hidden in a private Google Drive?

Reviewer: Design~~s~~

Author: Thank you! Corrected!

In order to alleviate these questions and concerns, we have moved to Github to keep track of our RFCs moving forward.

> 

Reviewer: I was expecting to see a section on **When is an RFC required?** but perhaps that's part of a separate software practice discussion.

Author: I added a section about it which is kind of strawman but part of it will be also a practice/cultural discussion.

2. Create a new directory under the `rfcs` directory named `XXXX-name-of-rfc`, where `name-of-rfc` is the name of your RFC, not those words directly.
3. Copy over the contents of the `templates` directory into your newly created directory. This contains a folder for images and the RFC template.
4. Rename `rfc_template.md` to `text.md` and edit it. Add images that you'd like to include in the `imgs` folder.
5. When you are ready for review, create a pull request. Add your approvers (and any other people you'd like to review your work) as reviewers on the PR. 
6. As a courtesy, post a heads up on the [#org-sci-eng-single-cell](https://chanzuckerbergteam.slack.com/archives/GQGPP7925) Slack channel that there is a design available for review, specifically calling out the approvers. Generally, two weeks is nice for substantial designs to get reviewed, but use your best judgement on how much time you'd like for your design to be under review.
7. Once all comments are addressed and the *approvers* have approved your pull request, **change the name of your directory** from `XXXX-name-of-rfc` to pick the next number (for example, this one will be `0000-rfc-process`).

> 8. Push your design! Delete your branch! Close your design ticket! Code away!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
8. Merge your PR! Delete your branch! Close your design ticket! Code away!
```

> ## How to update an existing RFC

Reviewer: Generally editorial and non-normative changes do not require another review cycle? For example, _Minor and trivial changes MAY be made freely, with no announcement by the author(s) of the RFCs. Such changes include correcting typos, re-wordings, and the like._

Author: Thank you! I've copied over your wording and lowercased the "MAY" as I've opted this time to make the language a little less rigorous.

The following are the steps to revising an existing RFC:

1. Create a new branch of the `cellxgene-rfcs` repo.
2. Make your changes in the appropriate RFC. If there are new approvers, **append** them to the list of approvers at the top of the RFC.
3. Create a pull request. This is probably the most important step and most different step from creating a branch new RFC. In the top level comment of the pull request, ensure that you succinctly summarize the changes. Also note in the top level comment of the RFC who the approvers are of the specific pull request. This is done so that later in `blame` you can easily find out the commits that affected a file (RFC) and who was involved.
4. As a courtesy, post a heads up on the [#org-sci-eng-single-cell](https://chanzuckerbergteam.slack.com/archives/GQGPP7925) Slack channel that there is a design modification available for review, specifically calling out the approvers. Use your best judgement on how much time you'd like for your modification to be under review, but roughly should be anywhere from a couple days to 2 weeks, depending on the size of the change. Note that huge changes like re-architecting probably warrants its own RFC.

> 5. Once all comments are addressed and the *approvers* have approved your pull request, push the change!

Reviewer 2: We might need to be a little prescriptive about making sure the commit message is a pretty fleshed out changelog entry, since I think that's the only place such a thing will exist.

Author: Do you have some guidelines in mind? @mckinsel

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Once all comments are addressed and the *approvers* have approved your pull request, merge the PR!
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like "Make sure the commit message has a reasonably complete summary of the changes and why there were made."

Author: Done -- took some of it and modified some of it. Thanks!

6. As a courtesy, post a heads up on the [#org-sci-eng-single-cell](https://chanzuckerbergteam.slack.com/archives/GQGPP7925) Slack channel that there is a design available for review, specifically calling out the approvers. Generally, two weeks is nice for substantial designs to get reviewed, but use your best judgement on how much time you'd like for your design to be under review.
7. Once all comments are addressed and the *approvers* have approved your pull request, **change the name of your directory** from `XXXX-name-of-rfc` to pick the next number (for example, this one will be `0000-rfc-process`).
8. Merge your PR! Delete your branch! Close your design ticket! Code away!

## How to update an existing RFC

Minor and trivial changes may be made freely, with no announcement by the author(s) of the RFCs. Such changes include correcting typos, re-wordings, and the like.

> If the change is major, the following are the steps to revising an existing RFC:

Reviewer 4: I'm assuming this only applies to RFC's existing on `main`, for RFC's pending approval should **major** changes require a PR into the `XXXX-name-of-rfc` branch, or will the commit log of the existing branch suffice?

Author: Ooh great question! My inclination is that the commit log of the existing branch would suffice for RFCs that have not been approved, but I could be swayed! What do you think would be helpful (with a lean towards answering "will someone actually read it one day")?

Reviewer 4: Originally I thought it would be useful as a medium for major suggestions and leaving the review process for comments/questions. But I forgot about GitHub's suggestion feature.  In the end I don't think there's a need for nested PR's.

> 1. Create a new branch of the `cellxgene-rfcs` repo.

Reviewer 4: We may benefit for a naming convention to differentiate between new RFC's and amendments to existing RFC's

Author: Great idea! I was trying to avoid being too prescriptive with the branch naming but it could be helpful! I'll add it in as a suggestion if that works for you?

Author: Added suggested branch names! Let me know what you think.

If the change is major, the following are the steps to revising an existing RFC:

> 1. Create a new branch of the `cellxgene-rfcs` repo. Suggested branch naming: `username/name-of-rfc-title-amendment`.

Reviewer 4: LGTM!
